Care Plan 12 Feb 2015 
Mary Smith 
Birthdate: 8/15/1947 
Address: 123 Anywhere Lane, Our Town, MD 2222x 
Participants in care planning: Dr. M. Welby (PCP), Nancy Nurse, RN (Care Coordinator in 
Dr. Welby’s office), Mary Smith, Marianne Smith (daughter-in-law) 
Characterizing Mary Smith’s situation: 
Mary has severe COPD with exercise-induced desaturation and chronic 
hemoconcentration. She has been intubated once so far but has been hospitalized 
three times this year for COPD exacerbation, most recently last week. She continues to 
smoke, though “only 3-4 cigarettes” per day and never when the children are in her 
house. Her PFTs today showed substantial desaturation with exercise and an FEV1 of 
only 35% of predicted. She should start on oxygen now. She is prescribed the optimal 
medications, but it has been difficult to have her understand the importance of taking 
controller medications on days when she feels better – she believes you take medicines 
only when you are sick. She will have the same challenge with continual oxygen, or 
nocturnal (she’s still deciding – especially with the ongoing smoking and a gas stove). 
She takes care of two of her grandchildren after school and recognizes that she does not 
have the energy to do more than to have them watch TV. She does not drive and is 
dependent upon her daughter-in-law to get to the pharmacy or the doctor (or anywhere 
else). She pays a neighbor to do the heavy housework now (starting in the last two 
months). She has Social Security income and owns a small home, she has Medicare and 
a Medigap policy, and her three sons and their families in the area pitch in to help her. 
We talked about the course of COPD and she wanted to know whether this would 
eventually be fatal. On the basis of her PFTs and recent complications, Dr. Welby 
confirmed her suspicion that this would get worse and probably would be fatal 
eventually, and most likely within a few years. Stopping smoking, using the 
medications, and using the oxygen would help. She wanted to be clear that she did not 
want to be on a ventilator ever again. Dr. Welby discussed the implications with her and 
they talked about CPR and decided against that also. Her daughter-in-law was not 
comfortable with these claims. Dr. Welby urged them both to think more about these 
decisions, but agreed to write out a POLST form with these instructions for now. She 
named her daughter-in-law as her durable power of attorney for health care. 
Marianne Smith was surprised at the seriousness of the illness and said that she and 
Mary Smith would talk with the rest of the family and try to provide more help for Mary, 
including trying to support her decisions and reminding her about her medicines.