India, country that occupies the greater part of South Asia. Its capital is New Delhi, built in 
the 20th century just south of the historic hub of Old Delhi to serve as India?s administrative 
centre. Its government is a constitutional republic that represents a highly diverse population 
consisting of thousands of ethnic groups and likely hundreds of languages. With roughly one 
sixth of the world?s total population, India is the second most populous country, after China. 
It is known from archaeological evidence that a highly sophisticated urbanized culture?the 
Indus civilization?dominated the northwestern part of the subcontinent from about 2600 to 
2000 BCE. From that period on, India functioned as a virtually self-contained political and 
cultural arena, which gave rise to a distinctive tradition that was associated primarily with 
Hinduism, the roots of which can largely be traced to the Indus civilization. Other religions, 
notably Buddhism and Jainism, originated in India?though their presence there is now quite 
small?and throughout the centuries residents of the subcontinent developed a rich 
intellectual life in such fields as mathematics, astronomy, architecture, literature, music, and 
the fine arts. Throughout its history, India was intermittently disturbed by incursions from 
beyond its northern mountain wall. Especially important was the coming of Islam, brought 
from the northwest by Arab, Turkish, Persian, and other raiders beginning early in the 8th 
century CE. Eventually, some of those raiders stayed; by the 13th century much of the 
subcontinent was under Muslim rule, and the number of Muslims steadily increased. Only 
after the arrival of the Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama in 1498 and the subsequent 
establishment of European maritime supremacy in the region did India become exposed to 
major external influences arriving by sea, a process that culminated in the decline of the 
ruling Muslim elite and absorption of the subcontinent within the British Empire.
Direct administration by the British, which began in 1858, effected a political and economic 
unification of the subcontinent. When British rule came to an end in 1947, the subcontinent 
was partitioned along religious lines into two separate countries?India, with a majority of 
Hindus, and Pakistan, with a majority of Muslims; the eastern portion of Pakistan later split 
off to form Bangladesh. Many British institutions stayed in place (such as the parliamentary 
system of government); English continued to be a widely used lingua franca; and India 
remained within the Commonwealth. Hindi became the official language (and a number of 
other local languages achieved official status), while a vibrant English-language 
intelligentsia thrived. India remains one of the most ethnically diverse countries in the world. 
Apart from its many religions and sects, India is home to innumerable castes and tribes, as 
well as to more than a dozen major and hundreds of minor linguistic groups from several 
language families unrelated to one another. Religious minorities, including Muslims, 
Christians, Sikhs, Buddhists, and Jains, still account for a significant proportion of the 
population; collectively, their numbers exceed the populations of all countries except China. 
Earnest attempts have been made to instil a spirit of nationhood in so varied a population, but 
tensions between neighbouring groups have remained and at times have resulted in outbreaks 
of violence. Yet social legislation has done much to alleviate the disabilities previously 
suffered by formerly ?untouchable? castes, tribal populations, women, and other traditionally 
disadvantaged segments of society. At independence, India was blessed with several leaders 
of world stature, most notably Mohandas (Mahatma) Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru, who 
were able to galvanize the masses at home and bring prestige to India abroad. The country 
has played an increasing role in global affairs. Contemporary India?s increasing physical 
prosperity and cultural dynamism?despite continued domestic challenges and economic 
inequality?are seen in its well-developed infrastructure and a highly diversified industrial 
base, in its pool of scientific and engineering personnel (one of the largest in the world), in 
the pace of its agricultural expansion, and in its rich and vibrant cultural exports of music, 
literature, and cinema. Though the country?s population remains largely rural, India has three 
of the most populous and cosmopolitan cities in the world?Mumbai (Bombay), Kolkata 
(Calcutta), and Delhi. Three other Indian cities? Bengaluru (Bangalore), Chennai (Madras), 
and Hyderabad?are among the world?s fastest growing high-technology centres, and most 
of the world?s major information technology and software companies now have offices in 
India. 
India is a diverse multi-ethnic country that is home to thousands of small ethnic and tribal 
groups. That complexity developed from a lengthy and involved process of migration and 
intermarriage. The great urban culture of the Indus civilization, a society of the Indus River 
valley that is thought to have been Dravidian-speaking, thrived from roughly 2500 to 1700 
BCE. An early Aryan civilization?dominated by peoples with linguistic affinities to peoples 
in Iran and Europe?came to occupy northwestern and then north-central India over the 
period from roughly 2000 to 1500 BCE and subsequently spread southwestward and 
eastward at the? Gaya, Bihar, India: Phalgu River Hindu pilgrims bathing and washing at a 
ghat (stairway) on the Phalgu River in Gaya, Bihar, India. ? R.A. Acharya/Dinodia Photo 
Library ? India: Naga expense of other indigenous groups. Despite the emergence of caste 
restrictions, that process was attended by intermarriage between groups that probably has 
continued to the present day, despite considerable opposition from peoples whose own 
distinctive civilizations had also evolved in early historical times. Among the documented 
invasions that added significantly to the Indian ethnic mix are those of Persians, Scythians, 
Arabs, Mongols, Turks, and Afghans. The last and politically most successful of the great 
invasions?namely, that from Europe? vastly altered Indian culture but had relatively little 
impact on India?s ethnic composition. Broadly speaking, the peoples of north-central and 
northwestern India tend to have ethnic affinities with European and Indo-European peoples 
from southern Europe, the Caucasus region, and Southwest and Central Asia. In northeastern 
India, West Bengal (to a lesser degree), the higher reaches of the western Himalayan region, 
and Ladakh, much of the population more closely resembles peoples to the north and east?
notably Tibetans and Burmans. Many aboriginal (?tribal?) peoples in the Chota Nagpur 
Plateau (northeastern peninsular India) have affinities to such groups as the Mon, who have 
long been established in mainland Southeast Asia. Much less numerous are southern groups 
who appear to be descended, at least in part, either from peoples of East African origin (some 
of whom settled in historical times on India?s western coast) or from a population commonly 
designated as Negrito, now represented by numerous small and widely dispersed peoples 
from the Andaman Islands, the Philippines, New Guinea, and other areas.
India has one of the largest, most highly diversified economies in the world, but, because of 
its enormous population, it is?in terms of income and gross national product (GNP) per 
capita? one of the poorest countries on Earth. Since independence, India has promoted a 
mixed economic system in which the government, constitutionally defined as ?socialist,? 
plays a major role as central planner, regulator, investor, manager, and producer. Starting in 
1951, the government based its economic planning on a series of five-year plans influenced 
by the Soviet model. Initially, the attempt was to boost the domestic savings rate, which 
more than doubled in the half century following the First Five-Year Plan (1951?55). With 
the Second Five-Year Plan (1956?61), the focus began to shift to import-substituting 
industrialization, with an emphasis on capital goods. A broad and diversified industrial base 
developed. However, with the collapse of the Soviet system in the early 1990s, India adopted 
a series of free-market reforms that fueled the growth of its middle class, and its highly 
educated and well-trained workforce made India one of the global centres of the high-
technology boom that began in the late 20th century and produced significant annual growth 
rates. The agricultural sector remains the country?s main employer (about half of the 
workforce), though, with about one-fifth of the gross domestic product (GDP), it is no longer 
the largest contributor to GDP. Manufacturing remains another solid component of GDP. 
However, the major growth has been in trade, finance, and other services, which, 
collectively, are by far the largest component of GDP.
The architects of India?s constitution, though drawing on many external sources, were most 
heavily influenced by the British model of parliamentary democracy. In addition, a number 
of principles were adopted from the Constitution of the United States of America, including 
the separation of powers among the major branches of government, the establishment of a 
supreme court, and the adoption, albeit in modified form, of a federal structure (a 
constitutional division of power between the union [central] and state governments). The 
mechanical details for running the central government, however, were largely carried over 
from the Government of India Act of 1935, passed by the British Parliament, which served 
as India?s constitution in the waning days of British colonial rule. The new constitution 
promulgated on January 26, 1950, proclaimed India ?a sovereign socialist secular democratic 
republic.? With 395 articles, 10 (later 12) schedules (each clarifying and expanding upon a 
number of articles), and more than 90 amendments, it is one of the longest and most detailed 
constitutions in the world. The constitution includes a detailed list of ?fundamental rights,? a 
lengthy list of ?directive principles of state policy? (goals that the state is obligated to 
promote, though with no specified timetable for their accomplishment [an idea taken from 
the Irish constitution]), and a much shorter list of ?fundamental duties? of the citizen. The 
remainder of the constitution outlines in great detail the structure, powers, and manner of 
operation of the union (central) and state governments. It also includes provisions for 
protecting the rights and promoting the interests of certain classes of citizens (e.g., 
disadvantaged social groups, officially designated as ?Scheduled Castes? and ?Scheduled 
Tribes?) and the process for constitutional amendment. The extraordinary specificity of 
India?s constitution is such that amendments, which average nearly two per year, have 
frequently been required to deal with issues that in other countries would be handled by 
routine legislation. With a few exceptions, the passage of an amendment requires only a 
simple majority of both houses of parliament, but this majority must form two-thirds of those 
present and voting.
The provision of free and compulsory education for all children up to age 14 is among the 
directive principles of the Indian constitution. The overall rate of literacy has increased 
markedly since the late 20th century, but a noticeable disparity has remained between males 
and females (roughly three-fourths and about half, respectively). There is also a considerable 
disparity in literacy rates between the states. The state of Kerala has the highest rate, where 
nearly all are literate, in contrast to Bihar, where the proportion is about half. Preuniversity 
education generally consists of five years of primary education (classes I through V), 
normally for pupils aged 6 to 11; middle level (classes VI through VIII); lower secondary 
(classes IX and X); and higher secondary (classes XI to XII). The great majority of all 
children of primary-school age are enrolled, though many, especially girls, may not attend 
regularly. Enrollment thereafter falls off precipitously, to about half of all children aged 11 to 
14, despite the fact that education is free in most states for students of both sexes at least 
until class X. Formerly a state responsibility, education was made a joint responsibility of the 
union and state governments by constitutional amendment. The union government has 
subsequently played a larger role in promoting the education of girls and other socially 
disadvantaged groups, largely through fiscal grants for the support of particular programs 
(e.g., reimbursement of tuition, where it is charged, for girls in classes IX?XII), and in 
launching a variety of progressive educational initiatives. In addition to publicly financed 
schools, there are at all levels private and church-run schools (largely by Christian missions), 
for which tuition is required. Entrance into these often prestigious, predominantly English-
language institutions is eagerly sought for the children of those parents who can afford them.
 India is a large and diverse polyglot nation whose tempo of life varies from region to region 
and from community to community. By the early 21st century the lifestyle of middle-class 
and affluent urban families differed little from that of urbanites in Europe, East Asia, or the 
Americas. For the most part, however, the flow of rural life continued much as it always had. 
Many small villages remained isolated from most forms of media and communications, and 
work was largely done by hand or by the use of animal power. Traditional forms of work and 
recreation only slowly have given way to habits and pastimes imported from the outside 
world. The pace of globalization was slow in much of rural India, and even in urban areas 
Western tastes in food, dress, and entertainment were adopted with discrimination. Indian 
fashions have remained the norm; Indians have continued to prefer traditional cuisine to 
Western fare; and, though Indian youths are as obsessed as those in the West with pop 
culture, Indians produce their own films and music (albeit, strongly influenced by Western 
styles), which have been extremely popular domestically and have been successfully 
marketed abroad. Throughout India, custom and religious ritual are still widely observed and 
practiced. Among Hindus, religious and social custom follows the samskara, a series of 
personal sacraments and rites conducted at various stages throughout life. Observant 
members of other confessional communities follow their own rites and rituals. Among all 
groups, caste protocols have continued to play a role in enforcing norms and values, despite 
decades of state legislation to alleviate caste bias. For almost all Indians the family is the 
most important social unit. There is a strong preference for extended families, consisting of 
two or more married couples (often of more than a single generation), who share finances 
and a common kitchen. Marriage is virtually universal, divorce rare, and virtually every 
marriage produces children. Almost all marriages are arranged by family elders on the basis 
of caste, degree of consanguinity, economic status, education (if any), and astrology. A bride 
traditionally moves to her husband?s house. However, nonarranged ?love marriages? are 
increasingly common in cities.
Virtually all regions of India have their distinctive places of pilgrimage, local saints and folk 
heroes, religious festivals, and associated fairs. There are also innumerable festivals 
associated with individual villages or temples or with specific castes and cults. The most 
popular of the religious festivals celebrated over the greater part of India are 
Vasantpanchami (generally in February, the exact date determined by the Hindu lunar 
calendar), in honour of Sarasvati, the goddess of learning; Holi (February?March), a time 
when traditional hierarchical relationships are forgotten and celebrants throw coloured water 
and powder at one another; Dussehra (September?October), when the story of the Ramayana 
is reenacted; and Diwali (Divali; October?November), a time for lighting lamps and 
exchanging gifts. The major secular holidays are Independence Day (August 15) and 
Republic Day (January 26).

